# Filters

Filters allow you to include or exclude items from your index. These items will be types of files or folders found in the storage media. You may want to filter for some items i.e. include items, or filter out or ignore i.e. exclude others.

For example; you may be looking for all your photographs on an external drive. However that contains at least two system folders $recycle, $sys. You will wish to exclude those folders and addition you will want to include all the types of files that contain photographs.

# Identifying items

Items to be included or excluded will be files and folders found in the storage media. Files and Folders can be identified by there full path. However files will be rarely identified in this way but most likely files will be identified by file type. File types are denoted extension.

## Identified by full path

Identified by full path is used in a number of cases for example; the windows system folder will normally excluded from the indexing search for example. Other common folders to excluded are a group of system folders such as Program files and temp folders etc.

## File Types

A file extension, or filename extension, is a suffix at the end of a file. It comes after the period and is usually two to four characters long. If you’ve ever opened a document or viewed a picture, you’ve probably noticed these letters at the end of your file.

File extensions are used by the system to identify the type of contents the file contains. And by the extension, what apps are associated with what file types—in other words, what app opens when you double-click the file on most operating systems. For example, a file named “dsc0009.jpg” has the “jpg” file extension. When you open that file in Windows, for example, the operating system looks for whatever application is associated with JPG files, opens that app, and loads the file.

In Index-It file types are identified by there File extension such as in the example above. The .jpg file extension is used on compressed image files. The JPG/JPEG format is widely used for photographs and Internet graphics.

JPG files are interchangeably referred to as JPG or JPEG images. JPEG is an acronym for Joint Photographic Experts Group, which is the committee that invented the file format.

Most file extensions like jpg are consistent in specifying there contents many are also associated with a MIME type.

### File Type Classes

File type classes are collections of file types grouped by a common category such as photographs. This is a feature of Index-it an so the classes must be generated by Index-it however once created can be used again.

### What If I Don’t See File Extensions on My Files?

By default, Windows shows file extensions. For a while—in Windows 7, 8, and even 10—this was not true, but fortunately, they changed the default settings. We say fortunately because we feel showing file extensions is not only more helpful but more secure. Without file extensions showing, it can be hard to tell whether that PDF file you’re looking at (for example) is really a PDF file and not some malicious executable file.

If file extensions are not showing for you in windows, they’re easy enough to turn back on. In any File Explorer window, just head to View > Options > Change folder and search options. In the Folder Options window, on the “View” tab, uncheck the “Hide extensions for known file types” box.

## Folder Names

Folders can be identified by name. A common folder name will be “.icon” as windows will create these by default and need to be excluded from the index.

# Special Filters

Special filters help you simplify common filtering problems that arise due to say indexing the system disk where some files or folders need to be handled in a special way such as excluding all user folders except the current user for example.

## Default Filters

Default filters help you simplify common filtering tasks such as excluding all system types or folders.

## Filters defined by environment.